To Stephen Ambrose.
Anyway, that wall changes with every book.
Two years ago, it was a big, huge, enormous map of detail.
Of the beaches that I used a lot, actually, because so darn many French villages involved.
And before that, the hell was all of this.
Oh, I had all Dick Nixon up there.
I had a Nixon poster.
Nixon's the one.
It's a wonderful Nixon poster.
68 or 72?
68.
And before that, it was all Eisenhower.
And now I've got to change it back to World War II, because that's what I'm working on now.
Why is that?
Do you need these little icons, so to speak, when you're working?
Can I give you a little bit of ambiance for what you're working on?
Just nice.
Nice.
When your eyes come up?
I don't know how often it registers continuously.
If it's a map of D-Day up there, I'm just using it all the time.
Really, it was such a big map.
It was about the only place I could put it.
But this, over here, the Charlie Russell of Lewis and Clark meeting the flatheads, and then these two Missouri River pictures and the Lewis and Clark statues always stand.
Of course.
I'm sure the rifle is... The rifle's always up there.
Is that a...
Kentucky rifle?
Yes, that's a Kentucky rifle.
But you say that it really technically is not a Kentucky rifle, it's something else.
Yeah, it's a Virginia.
It's a Pennsylvania rifle.
So a good man could reload in about 30 seconds, I think you say.
Yeah, yeah.
Depending on the adrenaline level.
So, I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
No, go ahead.
All these photographs around are from the trips over the years all west that we took with the kids.
So these all go back 15 or 20 years.
But there are various scenes from everywhere along those.
These are pictures you shot and the family shot.
Maybe you could just describe a few of the places and the pictures that, you know, on this exterior wall here.
The one in the middle with that signpost three forks with me, that's at the three forks of the... What becomes at that point, right behind where I'm standing, becomes the Missouri River.
And the three rivers flowing in, you can see in that picture on the left up there, top, those are us in the canoes there.
And this is right where the rivers come together to form the Missouri River.
It's a gorgeous photograph.
Yeah.
Somebody took that, in your party, laid back and took that picture?
No, we had run into a professional photographer, very well-known, McDuff Everton, who was on a shoot for one of the glossy travel magazines, doing Lewis and Clark, and we ran into them.
And so we spent a couple of days together.
And I told him stories, and he took pictures.
I thought he was a very fair swap, you know, because he sent me some of the best of it.
That's nice.
Yeah.
Darn right.
So this is... In that upper left corner, those are pictures I took.
Those are in the White Cliffs of the Missouri River, which is the part of the whole thing that we love the most and have done the most.
And that's a 165-mile stretch of river
with no bridges, no power lines, and no anything.
So, the most remote part of the lower 48, really.
Wow.
So, it's still a lot like... Still is.
And very much the same condition that it might have been when... All is the same, except the Buffalo area.
The Buffalo might come back then.
It's being talked about some, and some little steps are being made.
Well, all those prairie grass, they didn't work good for cattle.
They need a lot richer feed than that, and those buffalo are, they get fat on that stuff.
They're the natural beast for the... So there's buffalo breeding that's going on, and some buffalo are running a bit wilder, and this is ideal country to turn it back to the buffalo.
It's perfect for it, because as you say, it's still a little bit.
Yeah, it's one person every 100 square miles or something.
So what are these ranchers?
Are there any ranchers out there that would protest?
Sure.
They're the ones that of course don't want that, right?
Yeah.
This will be a fight.
Very early in the book, you said, I guess you were out there with your family in 1975, and you thought that this would be a way to observe the bicentennial, would be to more or less retrace
prior to the Lewis and Clark expedition, and that prior to that you'd never read the journals, I guess.
That's right.
I was embarrassed by that, because I had a PhD from the University of Wisconsin, which had the best history of poverty in the country, and we thought the most rarest.
And I was certified by then to be capable of going into the College of Teaching American Survey history.
And I never read Losin Clark.
I don't know really why.
I just, I never had a specific course on that, what they called in those days the Jacksonian period.
Or the Jeffersonian Jackson period.
Anyway, I had never read the journal.
How did you feel when you read them?
You said, wow, I gotta go.
I just gotta go.
We began planning immediately.
And it was a very exciting spring.
getting out the L.L.
Bean catalog.
We were on a very tight budget.
I was an assistant professor, I guess.
Were you basically outdoor kinds of people?
Not really, no.
So this was really paying tribute to the expedition?
Yeah.
Well, we had been camping out on the Crazy Horse and Custer Buck, but nowhere near like one.
We did on this one.
That was all car camp.
Well, I like the fact that you took some of your students along that day.
Just 25 of them.
Yeah.
25 or so.
The first year, and then the scattered groups, never that many again.
In later years, smaller groups.
Yeah, they had a great time.
So were we.
Fun being learned.
Especially on that 4th of July.
Let my past, because they're on the upper right.
At what point did you decide that a book
Would you like to do a book on that?
Immediately.
Okay, immediately.
But that's habitual with me.
I get subjects by getting a curiosity.
And once I got that curiosity, the only way to satisfy is to write my own book, because I never find what satisfies the curiosity.
It's been the case of
all of my biographies and other work, too.
So, anyway, I immediately decided I was going to put a lot of time on this Lewis and Clark experience.
I wanted to know more.
I wanted to read the surrounding literature now that I've written.
That's what I do for a living.
I can't afford to put in that kind of time if I'm not going to be getting a return on it.
And that's both financially and emotionally.
So, naturally, it was going to be a bar.
Initially, it was going to be a travel log of the family on the Lewis and Clark Trail.
It was going to be a very personal book.
Yeah.
And boy, I really wasn't very high up on the advance ladder at that time, I remember, because I talked Doubleday, my then publisher, into giving us a $2,000 advance, without which we couldn't have even started out.
And I promised that all the kids would keep journals.
And Maura and I would keep journals, and then we'd blend and see what happened.
So you did get an advance for such a book.
$2,000.
But you had to be signed a contract, right?
Mm-hmm.
And is this back in the 70s?
And, yeah, it was before we even left.
It was necessary to finance the trip.
Well, I mean, it's not that anybody didn't cry.
We all wrote, but it didn't really work very well.
And I don't know what kind of a mood I was in or if it was just the kind of writing that I can't do.
But what I was sending in, or if it was, this is what I said.
It was a goddamn New York editor and nothing about the West.
But anyway, they indicated that they just weren't happy with it, and I said, fine, let's just forget the whole thing.
They never paid their money back.
They never asked for it back.
I'm looking for it.
Here's one.
So that was, in a way, the organ.
And then... Then I was... I was just caught in so many other things.
That I put the book out of my mind.
That book out, or any book on Lewis.
I never put the book on Lewis and Clark out of my mind.
But I was...
doing other things, although every summer we managed to get back to Montana and follow some part of the trail, or Idaho, or wherever.
And I worked on other books, meanwhile.
Quite a few of them.
And then finally, I finished the D-Day, which is a book I looked forward to for a long time, and it plotted out more than ten years ago exactly the timing of the thing, when I would need to be where to get it.
I finally had time to turn back to Lewis and Clark, and I wanted to, I figured my strengths are, I know a lot about the U.S.
Army.
I know I write a biography.
I have traveled this ground, and what I ought to do with those assets is do a biography of one of the captains.
I didn't really
I didn't care which one.
I did.
I liked Lewis's... has got a... I don't quite want to say this, but I can't tell you the other way.
He's got a depth to it that William Clark didn't have.
Or maybe it's just the complexity of his character were greater.
He was more appealing as a subject, too.
Plus, he was the leader.
He was the leader.
And plus, anyone who was tutored by Thomas Jefferson has to be a fascinating character.
That's right.
On the other hand, William Clark had not had a biography yet.
Interesting.
And there was, by this time, a 30-year-old Lewis biography that was fair.
But there had been 30 years of scholarship, so.
And a lot more is known.
But still, Clark had a very successful post-experience career, so that the ending is upbeat.
And Clark has certainly got his appealing characteristics to him.
So anyway, I called Eric Fritz in Montana.
I said, Eric, do you know what everybody's doing with a Clark biography?
Because none has ever been done.
And he said, yeah, James Rond is doing one.
And I said, oh, shit.
And Rond is a good historian.
And you quote him quite a bad book.
Then Harry said, look, there's been 30 years of scholarship on this expedition, and it's something that Lewis and Clark people are really proud of the writer, so there really has been a big new, wonderful scholarship.
And then I can bring two of those biographies, this kind of thing.
I recently wrote to
Hans von Luck, and John Howard, and Dick Winters.
There are three company commanders from this.
I don't know more.
One American Airborne, one rear airborne, one German Panzer.
And I've written about all three of them at some length.
But I wrote to all three of them to thank them for teaching me what a good company commander is.
And then I used those criteria in Gendron Lewis.
So I was able to draw on
It's a funny way to draw on things, from the future into the past.
But I learned things from how those three, or all three of them as great soldiers, did their job, and then applied what their principles were to realists.
They said, well, well, they matched.
Well, maybe it's not.
Maybe it's not even nobody.
I mean, men are men in there who don't respond at the same time.
But it's nice to put it down.
I drew a lot on knowing about Eisenhower and Roosevelt and Truman and the Cold War and leadership from the top.
And let me just interrupt, but also knowing a lot of these people personally, like Eisenhower.
These are people that you interviewed in great depth.
So this is not working from archival sources so much.
So you haven't been able to judge these people as people.
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
I think all that helped me in dealing with trying to take a fresh look at Thomas Jefferson.
How can you ever find a fresh point of view on Thomas Jefferson?
And you can't really by just saying the West, in the opening of the West, but the relationship with Meriwether Lewis is fresh.
That's nice.
And it was very nice, you know.
Just knowing the Washington scene from how it is and
the 1990s, in the 1800s, it was in so many ways the same.
The only difference was you didn't have electronic media.
With the gossip and the backbiting and the shuffling for position and the reporting going out and the complaints of the politicians about the kind of reporting going out and so on.
It's amazing because the politics of the thing
For the Federalists and the political battles.
And how partisan they were out there.
I mean, when you think how they opposed the purchase of the Louisiana Purchase.
The same way they opposed the purchase of Thomas Jefferson's books for the library.
There was this very political division, you know, really stupid when you think about it.
Do you consider this a biography, per se?
I feel that you do approach it as a historian and as a biographer.
Yeah, oh, very much so.
And you even mention at some point, you say, now I'm going to talk as a biographer and a historian.
You say at one point, well, I'm sure he kept these journals and they're out there someplace and we're going to find them.
That's not the historian talking, that's the biographer talking.
So that does allow you this latitude, doesn't it, to switch from one to another?
Which is kind of fun.
Very much so.
I'm doing a book now on the campaign in Northwest Europe.
There's a lot of guys that get these bolt bolsters up there.
What I need is a map.
And I... God damn, I forgot what we were talking about.
I think we're talking about the two disciplines, biographies.
Oh, right.
We're talking about the next book.
There is a point in there, and I'll remember.
Oh.
And in doing this book, and I just finished a chapter today, and I was switching from the high command to the guy in the field, as I did in the D-8 block.
Over this time, we get a lot more time to the guy in the field.
I just find him in more fascinating dollars.
And Bradley Eisenhower, Mining End Fights, less than Austin.
Of course, you've done some wonderful books in Eisenhower, though, which speaks to the other side of that.
Hmm.
I always try to look at it both as a biographer and a historian and see the meld between the two.
I became a biographer because I was convinced early on that, of course it mattered who was living in the U.S.
and William H. Seward would have failed.
And, of course it mattered who commanded the armies, for Christ's sake,
If the Union had lost to Gettysburg, it would be a whole different world.
These things are important.
How different, though, do you think?
I mean, do you believe with H.L.
Macon that at some point it would have resolved the differences, regardless of the outcome of the Civil War?
No, I don't see that at all.
Who knows what to think?
I mean, we don't paint any scenario to watch it.
The truth of the matter is, things would be a lot different.
When you're talking about something like the Civil War, any outcome other than the one that we had could hardly have been better.
Oh, I agree.
Absolutely, of course.
So any other is going to be worse.
That's right.
And then what?
Well, I don't know what.
Nobody knows what.
But I know goddamn well that it matters.
And that it mattered that General Grant was there in the wilderness to look over General Meade's shoulder.
And it mattered to all of us who have lived since that instant.
then we'll always continue to matter, so long as there is a republic.
So I find these people that make these decisions, whether they're political or military, not just fascinating and all right, but they're so consequential.
The mistake that dumb son of a bitch made has costed me today.
God, he kept us out of war.
We were better off for that, or whatever.
It might be.
It is a very important part of how I approach trying to meld the history and the biography and the one.
Are you mindful of it all the time?
Well, it's the impact of the individual on the situation from squad level through the high command in the war on to the White House and by to the Cold War.
So, I asked David Herbert Donald, what do you consider yourself, a historian or a biographer?
I guess we know him for his biographies.
Well, I'm a historian, but I've written some pretty good biographies.
I wonder how you would answer the same question, or are you both?
Are you combining the disciplines?
For my own part, I think that the disciplines are one.
I remember
When I was very junior, and I was at a meeting of the LSU history faculty to pick the speaker for the series, the named series that was the big deal there, each year in the issue department.
And a book comes out of it and so on, and the whole academic thing is there.
Harry Williams nominated Dick Koenig, and the chairman of the department said,
We're not going to have any goddamn biographers.
And Harry said, you're just wrong.
Edwin was the guy that said, you're just wrong, Edwin.
He is.
And he talked about current a while.
And I didn't think current wasn't right.
But that scene stuck with me.
And always in puzzling.
Because I just never could see the difference between biography and history.
Because history is people.
And it's what they do.
And it's what people choose and what decisions they make.
And on the basis of which they make them.
Et cetera.
All that goes into a decision making.
But it comes down to human affairs.
And sooner or later, there's one isolated, lonely son of a bitch who's got to decide.
We're going to do this or we're going to do that.
And you try to figure out everything that went into his or her makeup right up to that instant of decision and how much information they've taken in and whether he or she had asked the right questions or whatever.
So this whole concept of command, obviously, is something that seems to be a passion for you.
It is, yeah.
And I think we can see... It's funny, I've never been in charge of anything, really.
I mean, lately in my life, I've come on, I'm president of a board for a museum, and I'm... Here, in town?
Yeah, in the National Museum.
Oh, that one, yeah.
Well, that's in the world.
And I took on something of an administrative role with the Eisenhower Center.
But those little itsy-bitsy-keensies,
taste of the reality of running an operation.
I'm an academic and a writer.
Here's what I think.
And I don't have the skills and the experience and the knowledge to do it at all well, but I sure have studied it enough to have respect for those who can.
Sit there and make those decisions and put them through and get people behind them.
It's a... two rare towns.
And I see it in the last ten years of my life, I've been thrown in with an awful lot more CEOs than I ever expected to meet in my life.
Or a very rich man.
And they...
I think one element that we haven't considered, and it's essential because you say, I'm an academic and you're a teacher, which is, I guess, the same thing, but one thing we haven't taken into account is the fact that storytelling is very important.
You're writing these books, but you are writing them to engage
an audience beyond your colleagues, shall we say.
Also the lecture.
And teaching has been tremendously important to me.
Because it's a lot of audience.
Leaving all the other joys of teaching aside, and forgetting about the miseries, like reading essays, angles.
I paid my dues on that.
Teaching is an exhilarating experience because it's like a learning experience.
The act of having to teach something is a propellant into learning something like nothing remotely else can.
And so you learn an awful lot as part of the process of passing it on.
And you're also learning how to pass it on so that they listen.
And I think that the most important part of my writing is that I drive the narrative.
I almost never flash back and I never flash forward.
And I just keep that narrative driving along.
And you learn that in the classroom.
Interesting.
You learn that you're watching those students and you appreciate that.
Well, you know in an instant that you've lost them.
You know, it's funny.
Now, I hadn't, having read the book, it didn't occur to me that there were no flash-flowers or flashbacks.
It is a continuous narrative, and you even have the chapters by months, by seasons, by... And the reason for... And the reason for... Is because that's the way it happened.
And if you want to get into the mind of Merriweather Lewis, you can never be knowing, as author or reader, how it's going to turn out.
And, of course, your readers are going to know vaguely how it's going to turn out.
Now, when I'm writing about Eisenhower, they know, like, well, we're going to win World War II.
And so what you've got to do is to try to create affection in the reader's mind so that as you go along and you're in July of 1944, I've got a son of a vigil.
I know how this is going to turn out.
I don't know how this is going to turn out.
You have a scene in this book, Out in the River,
one of the very early meetings with Indians, I forget which tribe it is, and something's going wrong, and they prime up the cannon and the bow, the blunderbusters, and he's ready to, and you speculate, well, what happens if, and this is what Jefferson was very concerned about, this hot-headed attitude of his to say we're going to fight, and you say, boy, this one instance right here could have, so that does, I think, give the reader a little bit of,
apprehension, you know, it's a terrific device.
It's a literary device is what it is.
It is, and it brings up what is so important in history is chance.
That little tiny incident could have led to that we lost the Northwest.
I could skip you on a scenario, and we end up, we lose the Northwest because of that.
Who the hell's poem is it that for one of the males who was lost?
Funny, do you know?
That is history.
That's what makes history so much fun, and I think so instructive, and it's so fascinating.
intermixed in that is biography.
There isn't history without biography.
And then people want to, and whether that's right or wrong, and fuck, I ain't gonna fight with the Marxists their way over my head on philosophy anyway, or anybody else on philosophy.
But whether great men make history or whether
History makes great men, yeah.
History makes great men, and if Lincoln hadn't been there, somebody else wouldn't wear it.
Well Eisenhower's the quintessential example, isn't he?
I mean, who was a major at the start of World War II?
Yeah.
But that does speak to the size of the talent, how the talent pool is out there.
Then and now.
God, when we start to hire a man in the practice of the museum, it's incredible.
Credentials.
How about the people?
Well, I agree.
But that's... That's another story.
Yeah.
No, I forgot again where we were.
But we're doing fine.
We're talking about storytelling and narrative and the what-ifs story.
Yeah.
And the what-ifs of history.
Yeah, so... History is chance.
Just like evolution.
It's not the survival of the fittest, it's the survival of the luckiest.
It really is true, both in species and in human organizations, whether they're tribes or whatever.
And a lot of it depends on how well they're able to make war.
And people hate to hear that.
But, thank God, I'd love to read about it.
At some point, of course, it's irresistible, from my point of view, but where you have already said how fascinated you are with the whole concept of decision-making and command.
And, of course, we've all read about your friendship with General Powell and your advising.
There must be qualities in him that you have seen that relate to some of the things you've been telling me about here.
I don't know if it's stretching it a little bit, but, you know, something to think about.
Listen, on General Powell, I'm very good.
You want the 60-second, the 2-minute, the 5-minute, or the 15-minute?
15?
No, I'm not 15.
General Powell is a genuinely great manager, great leader.
He is, in my opinion,
quite possibly the best man in the earth has produced in this century.
And for my part, the only rival that I would see would be Martin Luther King Jr.
And that's because Powell has the qualities of leadership that are unique in the West,
I don't use the word unique the way the television reporter did it.
I knew what I said.
This includes Eisenhower.
You mean one of a kind, is what you're saying.
I mean, unique.
Yeah, unique.
I don't mean true freshmen, as I'm sitting out here.
I always want to meet some of these false freshmen I never seem to.
But... Now, you base this on...
I mean, were you attracted to these qualities before knowing him or by studying him?
No, I'm attracted to General Powell because of who he is and what he has said and what he does and what he stands for and how he does it.
But it all comes down to your right.
It comes down to, I'm a student of leadership and I think this man is the greatest leader in this country who's produced in this century.
It's quite a statement.
I know it is.
I'm well aware that it is.
And we've only got
four years left to the end of the century, so you're basically including the whole run, basically.
The whole run.
Teddy Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, Frank Roosevelt, Dwight Eisenhower, maybe Harry Truman, they would be the rivals.
Then maybe Henry Ford, maybe John D. Rockefeller.
There's no... no attorney than the rival.
Not Persian, not MacArthur, not even close.
I'm just wondering what
accomplishments you base this on.
Is this character that you're judging?
Character.
Character and personality and experience.
Because when you're talking about... I mean, when you talk about the Gulf War... You don't want to write a lot of Carol Powell in this.
I want to put a line in... If you do.
All right, all right.
I'm not going to deceive you.
Powell's accomplishments are many and varied.
Vietnam, two tours, with distinction.
And then...
as a corps commander in Germany, as a battalion commander in Korea, and he's gone up the run that is the U.S.
Army, and has emerged from that, first as advisor, then as chairman, and so dealing with the province in the absolute top, it just knows more about force than how to use it than anybody else in the country, period.
Nobody else is even close.
And he adds to that, he's black, but not all that poor.
He's good looking.
He comes out of the military.
He can bring a Republican candidate, minimum, absolutely minimum, 35% of the black vote, and then it's all for the Democrats.
That's Colin Powell.
He's going to be president of the United States.
And you can put that in.
If you decide to, but I mean, this is not off track or anything or any bullshit or anything else.
This is my deepest belief.
He's going to be president of the United States.
And it's going to be a great day for us, and it's going to be a great day for the world.
It's going to do more for race relations than any other single thing we could do around the world.
And there's a Republican, no less.
And there's a Republican.
He's going to bring the Republican Party back to the mainstream after they blow this election.
After the Republicans blow it.
Yeah.
Because they're probably going to blow it.
They're going to blow it.
Of course they're going to blow it.
They're going to run Bob Dole, and he's going to get 42 percent, and Bill's going to get 43 percent, and Bill's going to win.
That's where it's looking, sure.
That's the way it looks to me.
Well, be clear that this is my principal concern by any measure.
They asked me to ask you about Powell, and it'll be a couple graphs at the bottom of the piece, but... I just had a letter from the General of the Day, and he said, thanks for this book, and I'll be reading it this week, and then said... What I had been really responding to was I had said,
I told him it was a class story.
I'm going to tell you this in a minute ago.
I told him it was, and he called up after the press conference.
And he said, I'm sorry to disappoint you.
And I said, you know, and he cut me off.
He said, you know, I want to hear always the hardest decision I've ever made.
And I really thought, I'm sure that's true.
I'm afraid that's the line he's been using with the minimum of dozens, hundreds of people he's got to call.
And so I said, General, let me cut you off, and I don't always say the four stars, and tell you a story.
When Lewis and Clark got to the Moth and Marias River on the 3rd of June in 1805,
They hadn't expected it.
They were a thousand miles out and more from St.
Louis.
And they had explicit instructions to follow Missouri to its source.
Suddenly, here was a fork in the river, and they didn't know which one was the true Missouri.
So they camped for four days to send out expeditions to look up the rivers.
Smartly make judgments.
And came back, and the men to a man, as you said,
Lewis wrote in the journal, felt that the right-hand fork was the one intruder's area.
But Captain Clark and myself felt that the left-hand fork was in the area.
And then Lewis says in his journal, the men, to a man, said, no, Captain, you're wrong.
But they added very cheerfully, we will follow you wherever you direct.
And I said, come ask us the way I feel, Marty.
I want you to ask today.
And he said, exactly what I feel.
He said, thanks.
That's a lot.
Go ahead, man.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
And so he wrote today to say, I'd send him a copy of his book.
I said, obviously your time is, but I hope you can just look at it.
I think you'll be mesmerized by it.
And as you pointed out also, it's the only instance in the history of the United States Army where you had a successful joint command.
I mean, it's unbelievable.
That actually was able to work.
And the extraordinary goodwill of Lewis to not only invite him, but to assure him, even after they make him a lieutenant, make Clark a lieutenant, which is... It's a wonderful story.
It's a great story, yeah.
It's...
I tried a novel once.
Lewis and Clark novel.
Yeah, I was going to do the diary of one of the privates.
How long ago?
George Shannon.
Oh, this was about ten years ago.
So you're still trying to get something out of that strip, I can see, right?
One of the things that drives me is I would always have to prepare to stand in front of that IRS judge.
And I'm always prepared to stand around and say, Your Honor, I'd never leave the house without a profit board.
And every trip that I take is a tax deduction because I'm looking at the local place to see if... That's what a writer does.
Totally legitimate.
I haven't had to stand in front of the judge yet.
You'll see how if he agrees with that assessment...
We got a good start here.
Yeah, good.
This is good stuff.
Good.
Terrific.
Well, yeah, great.
We're going to go out in about... Let's go down and have another beer and a Coca-Cola.
I'll find another beer.
And this place is... Let me talk about food a little bit.
This is...
This is our best restaurant on the coast.
And it's a chef from New Orleans who wanted what almost all the people who live along this road to Ujurnalong from wanted.
They're all people who, one way or another, made their clear in New Orleans.
And they come over here to live.
And the chef is one of those.
So this is as good a chef as you would get virtually anywhere in New Orleans.
They have little funky kinds of plates.
So that's where we're going to dinner.
Now, Marl, since we got it started, that's what I wanted to do.
We could do another hour, hour and a half in the morning.
I think so, yeah.
And you guys are free.
And go into the quarter and then, Christ, this is going to work near the table.
It's all good.
We were there for an ABA about 10 years ago.
People don't come here for nothing.
It's just good.
You drive in and get yourself a good parking place in the corner, and then you'll just have a wonderful time.
We're at the Missouri River Breaks.
On this photograph here.
This is your family on the Missouri River.
You look like a pretty tough out there.
I was looking at the map.
I always loved that picture except that I'm not looking ahead.
But I know exactly what happened.
You kind of look like Murray and the Lewis thing yourself there.
I had the map down on my knees and I was looking at that map.
Wow.
Isn't that nice?
Yeah, you see tons of these pelicans flying by.
Well, you mentioned that, too.
You say that at one point, they see a three-mile-long feathers coming down the river.
And these rifles over here.
Look at all these rifles.
There's a bust of Eisenhower.
We haven't even talked about it.
We have to get that in at some point, too.
I guess it was the second summer.
That's our daughter, Stephanie, who...
announced the previous summer, which was our first time in the state, that she said, Dad, your grandchildren have been born and raised in Montana, as a result of this family excursion, right?
And she then went to the University of Montana, I think probably the fall after this summer, and by her senior year she was living with a Montana boy, and they went to graduate school and then got married,
married now and have kids.
They are bred and born and being raised in Montana.
And she was 16 when she announced that before she'd even met him.
This is, this is, yeah, this is up in, this is the Missouri River.
And you can see this, and we took this picture to illustrate this.
This is irrigated by everyone's own wheat.
So if they have a pump down here to draw water out of the river and throw it onto those plants, you can see what happened.
With the rats, this is what Lewis and Clark saw.
I mean, the sergeant dies early on and that's, you know.
That's it.
One guy caught him.
This is, oh, let me tell you this one.
This was taken at the very headwaters of the Missouri River, where Lewis records in his journal that Neal stood exultingly with a foot on each side of this little rivulet, and thank his God that he had lived with his stride the mighty and heretofore deemed endless Missouri River.
And there I am striding the Missouri River.
That's the Missouri River.
Wow.
Who's this handsome guy?
That looks like a naval officer lieutenant there.
I'm a former Naval officer myself, but we had the white hats when I was then.
The Navy's always had the best uniform.
The best.
The Navy beats everybody.
Hands down.
It's true.
I tell my wife that.
She doesn't believe me.
The Air Force looks like they're a bus driver.
Okay, it's on.
After December 12,
Right.
I'll be at 1606 Hauser, H-A-U-S-E-R, Helena, Montana, 59601.
Okay.
And the telephone number there is 406-443-7943.
Correct.
Good.
I'll be working on this next week.
Good stuff.
Say that again.
What I do is storytelling.
I'm a storyteller.
And when I bring to a class, or writing, doesn't matter.
At the computer.
In my mind, yeah, at the computer.
In my mind, I'm sitting around a campfire, and I want to tell the story in a certain way that everybody's leaning forward just a little bit, because they don't want to miss what's coming next.
And it's surprising to me how many historians don't understand that.
And so they're flashing forward and back all the time.
and they lose all the tension that is just built into the story if you just tell it as a story.
Armand says yes, you see.
Emory Upton and Henry Halleck and... and other figures I've written about, they're all unique.
But... Meriwether Lewis... Greatest leader of all.
In his own little tiny sphere, there's only a platoon of men, there's 32 men.
Amazing.
But he took them across the continent, and he got them back, and he drew out a little more than they ever thought they had in them to give.
So that's leadership, that's command, too, I think.
And that's exactly right.
A different CO never could have gotten that expedition across the mountains, much less down the Pacific period.
He just couldn't have done it.
You mentioned earlier tonight that instead of doing Clark,
But he is kind of the other presence of the book, isn't he?
Yeah, and I think that's accurate.
Jefferson Pick Lewis.
and told Lewis to pick the crew.
And Lewis did, and he picked as a part of the crew, William Clark, and Clark's commission came down as a lieutenant.
Lewis had promised Clark
I don't think that it was that way.
I don't think it was a cold command.
I think that William Clark and Meriwether Lewis always knew between them that if they ever had a disagreement, Lewis was in command.
They never had a disagreement.
They could not have anticipated that.
Nobody could have anticipated that.
And so we don't know.
But if they had had a disagreement, Lewis was the one in the position to say, this is what we're going to do.
And he also had the presidential commission, which I think is... Because he had a presidential commission in his pocket.
Which we have to take, you know, not to be taken lightly, I don't think.
But you mentioned, again, it's looking at these little things, reading these little journal entries.
Lewis writes back a letter, which is while they're preparing.
And he says, look for this.
Will you go through my desk?
It's in my desk.
It's in my letters.
And so you...
Steve Ambrose says, it's just one little phrase, but how implicit is the trust this man has and the other man to say, go through my private stuff.
I give you permission to look to my desk, to my personal offense.
That tells you something about this kind of symbiotic relationship.
It was a wonderful friendship.
But you figure that out and you develop that into a sort of thing.
which I'm marveling at your craft as a writer, picking that little thing up.
But thanks.
I've been telling my wife, I said, honey, when I'm done.
Who the hell wouldn't enjoy anything like this?
Of course I'm enjoying the hell out of it.
it's especially nice to have people saying that you're doing this and you're doing that and i've been doing this all my life and i've been working at it and i've been trying to be a better storyteller for pushing 40 years now
I have to say I kind of directed us toward that because your scholarship is outstanding, it's magnificent, and you insist on the footnotes and the text as opposed to endnotes.
That's kind of a very traditional scholarly way to do things.
But you're really focusing on the storytelling and not boring the reader.
And it shows.
It shows.
It's wonderful.
History should be accessible.
I think it's the height of arrogance to wait for your colleagues and other professionals.
I think that history not only ought to be accessible, but it is critical.
To know where you've been, you've got to know where you're going.
And you cannot know where you're at unless you know how you got there.
It's an old navigator's rule.
I've done some sailing.
And you can't figure out where you're at unless you can figure out how you got to where I'm at.
And then where you're going after that.
I don't know that history has a lot to tell us about where we're going after that.
It would be nice to say that
If you'd only study history more, folks, you wouldn't make mistakes, but obviously that's not true.
And it won't help you.
Do you know what else?
Well, I read Bill and Elaine's wonderful magisterial six-volume biography of Jefferson.
Yeah, it is one of my favorites, yeah.
You read the phrase sine qua non a couple of times in the books.
That is a sine qua non Jefferson biography.
Jefferson, towards the end of the book, you imagine Lewis is home and he's got his map.
And Jefferson is falling on the wall.
Isn't that scene wonderful?
That is such a wonderful, wonderful scene.
Jefferson is waiting.
I don't invent anything.
If they didn't say anything, I don't use it.
I mean, it's what they said.
So let's see where Jefferson is on his knees going over the chart prepared by Lewis.
This is based on Jefferson's own testimony.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Jefferson said it.
We got down on our knees.
We looked at the map.
Cut.
from his writing.
But, you know, you can just imagine the scene.
Oh, imagine it.
I'm not thrilled by it, actually.
There they are, down on their knees, looking at this goddamn map.
Whoa, oh, that's what it's like.
You can hope this book connects with
the whole environmental movement.
Because this is the North American environment and what most of us think of is at its first time.
And certainly that was true for Missouri and all the way to Idaho and beyond the Pacific.
This is how it was.
And it's fascinating to see it from the point of view of those who were living there, whether Indian or white, and trying to make a living and I guess survive in these mountains and these galleys and these plains.
All of us would like to have been there.
Not all of us, but some of us who desperately have loved to have been here.
Yeah.
I think.
Not everyone wants to have been here.
I guess not.
I guess that's right.
I'm sure that's right.
Ask my wife if she would like to take a trip to the moon before we say no.
I would love to go.
But God, there's a lot of people, God, we'd like to have been first.
God, wouldn't I have loved to have seen this country when I didn't know it was around the bend of the river.
You say that Lewis compares himself to Columbus.
Another great scene.
And he said, you know what, he's on the money here.
He is.
And he was, wasn't he?
That's right.
I mean, he's forcing them.
Nothing.
Charles Jefferson taught him how to do things, and he set them up to a crash course in Philadelphia.
Celestial fixes and things like that.
And yet, boy, his river is perfect.
His track coming from a perfect map.
It's a little less if it's a little shaky, but, you know, so unbelievable.
Dick, I'll tell you, if that comes down to for me, it would have been fun to have been Dwight Eisenhower.
And the big problems were obviously handled.
It would have been fun to be Dick Nixon.
The big problems, and a lot of them didn't turn out well, to say the least.
I'd like to have been Meriwether Lewis.
Or with them, at least?
I'd like to have been with them.
I'd like to have been marching beside them.
I'd like to have been tested in the way that they were tested.
And I think I would have survived, I think, if I was 22, 21.
I was playing football in those years.
What did you play?
What was your position?
Middle guard.
Middle linebacker and left guard.
It was 60 minute days.
I'm the last Big Ten player who played 60 minutes.
The last.
Nobody's done it since.
I did it against Ohio State.
You played in Wisconsin?
In Wisconsin.
Did you beat the Buckeyes or what?
One out of three.
Don't talk about it.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
But, but, out of all the... It's so fiddly.
I mean, it's worth comparing it.
I think the great thing, it would have been wonderful to go to Washington and Valley Forest.
It would have been wonderful.
And to have been with the 29th Division on D-Day and survived would have been wonderful.
I think all the wonderful, wonderful things with Lewis and Clark crossing the Continental Divide
Descending to the Pacific.
That had to be the highest high of ever.
Of ever.
For anybody, anywhere.
Well, would you like to go... Now, obviously, Columbus compares.
Obviously, Magellan compares.
Obviously, Captain Cook compares.
But the truth is, I'd like to have been with Lewis and Clark.
And that's just my predecessors in America.
That was our continent that they crossed, and they're the ones that tied us together, west and east.
I just anticipated the question I was going to ask, because personally, I said, you must be basing this on your pride in America.
Because I would love to have been with Captain Cook.
Have you ever seen the art?
Wouldn't it have been wonderful if Lewis and Clark had been able to bring along artists?
One of their biggest mistakes, yes.
The way Cook brought along artists.
That would have been wonderful.
And they should have done it.
There's no excuse.
It drives me nuts.
When I look at the paintings, I have the Yale edition of the Three Warriors, Captain Cook's paintings.
He brought a lot of artists.
And you should see the four paintings.